# HistoricalDictionaryExpansion

Table of contents
-----------------
- [Installation and setup](#installation)
- [Running the code](#code)

## Installation

We strongly recommend installation via Anaconda:

* Refer to [Anaconda website and follow the instructions](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/).

* Create a new environment:

```bash
conda create -n py37_tsd python=3.7
```

* Activate the environment:

```bash
conda activate py37_tsd
```

* Install dependencies:

```bash
cd /path/to/my/TargetedSenseDisambiguation
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Also, we use a [spaCy](https://spacy.io/) model: [en_core_web_lg](https://spacy.io/models/en#en_core_web_lg) which can be installed:

```bash
python -m spacy download en_core_web_lg
```

## Code

This section explain how to run the code. For most of scripts you'd need credentials for the Oxford Historical Dictionary Research API. These scripts are marked by `\*\*`. More information on obtaining access to the API can be found [here](https://languages.oup.com/research/oed-researcher-api/)

**[WARNING]** Results produced by this notebook may slightly differ from those in the paper, this is because:
- the source data (the quotations stored in the OED) may change over time
- the order is which data is retrieved and stored changes with each run, reulting in the different splits for train, validation and test. Please contact the author 

However, the authors have rerun the pipeline multiple time and scores produced by these scritps are close to the one's reported in the paper and don't affect the conclusions drawn from the experiments.

The only deviation may be results for the curated experiments, which tend to be more volatile.

### Generate Dataframe

This script `generate_dataframes.py` downloads data from the API for a given headword and vectorizes the keyword of the quotations.

**[WARNING]** This script requires access to the historical BERT are available on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/4782245#.YKqQzZNKjlw).  Please copy `bert_1760_1850` and `bert_1760_1900` models to the `models` folder.

Before running this script move 1760- and model to the `models` folder and adjust the path in lines 7-8.

**[WARNING]** To download the data you need access to the OED API, more information on how to obtain credential is available [here](https://languages.oup.com/research/oed-researcher-api/). Once you have the credentials add them to `oed_credentials.json`.

```python
python generate_dataframes.py
```

All results should be saved in the `/data` folder. Almost all next steps require these data as input.

### Running Experiments

#### Comparing BERT models

The code snippet below runs the main experiment that tests the effect of plugging in historical BERT models.

**[WARNING]** This script requires access to a historical word2vec model which available on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/4782245#.YKqQzZNKjlw). Please copy the `w2v_1760_1900` model to the `models` folder.

```python
python run_main_experiment.py 
```


All results should be saved in `result_{year}` folder.

#### Time-sensitive approaches

To create results files for the time-sensitive methods, run:

```python
python python run_experiment_ts_disambiguation.py
```

Then run `run_experiment_ts_disambiguation.py` to run the experiments with time-sensitive disambiguation.

```python
python run_experiment_ts_disambiguation.py
```

#### Case-studies

To run the case studies, execute:

```python
python run_experiment_curated_cases.py 
```

### Create Results

To create the results from the output generated by the experiments, run the cells in `create_results_tables.ipynb`. This notebooks is runnable using the `.csv` files with results provided by this `.zip` archive.

### Explore Results

To explore results and recreate Figure 1, run cells in `explore_results.ipynb`. This notebooks requires output from `generate_dataframes.py` (saved in the `./data` folder).

## Fin.
